Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn about next steps you can take to continue developing your
Wordpress skills.
Because while we have come to the end of this course I don't want to leave you hanging.
I want to give you clear paths forward to continue growing.
First let's review what we've learned so far in the course.
We learned how to use Wordpress to create as many pages as we would like.
We learned how to create as many blog posts and blog categories as we would like.
We learned how to create a photo gallery and we learned how to create an interactive contact page.
Now those are the building blocks for most web sites.
But sometimes you'll want to do more.
Now there is an infinite number of different things you might want to do with your website so I can't
possibly prepare you for every scenario but what I can do is let you know the steps that I take personally
when I want to do something new or custom or unique with my wordpress websites.
So here are the steps and or topics that we will review throughout the remainder of this lesson.
We will go through these one by one in detail.
And let's start at the top with googling.
OK so the first thing I want to stress here is that the Wordpress community is absolutely huge.
About 27 percent of the entire web runs on wordpress.
So this means whenever we want to do something with wordpress.
But we aren't sure how to do it.
Chances are someone on the Internet has already asked the same question we have and they've already
received an amazing answer.
So whenever I need to do something with wordpress but I don't know how to I just google for wordpress.
How do I blank where blank is obviously whatever you're trying to achieve.
Now I know Googling and clicking on random search results can be stressful because you don't know which
Web sites are safe to visit.
So here's a list of my favorite Web sites.
If you see any of these domains in your Google search results I'd recommend clicking on them right away.
Kodak's dot WordPress dot org.
This is the official WordPress documentation Web site.
Stack Overflow.
WordPress dot stack exchange dot com YouTube dot com WordPress dot org slash support.
That's the official WordPress message board form CSSA trick's dot com and W.P. beginner dot com.
Now by all means.
I'm not saying that if a Web site isn't on this list you shouldn't visit it.
I'm not saying that at all.
These are simply Web sites that have great reputations are safe and that I've had positive experiences
with.
OK so that's the first thing I wanted to cover in this lesson which is simply never underestimate the
power of Google.
There's a running joke that web developers basically make a living for Googling all day and there's
definitely some truth to that joke.
So at this point now that we've worked through this course together and you have a general understanding
of the Wordpress vocabulary and how the puzzle pieces fit together now the world is yours.
All this information is at your fingertips and with your new WordPress vocabulary I think you'll understand
more of it than you give yourself credit for.
All right let's move on to the next topic which is free plug ins versus premium plug ins.
Let me begin by saying that throughout this entire course all of the plugins that we've used have been
free plug ins.
So from the admin dashboard within the left hand side bar when we click on plug ins.
And then we click on Add new this collection of thousands of plug ins that we can search through.
These are all free plug ins.
There is however a whole other separate world of premium plug ins a premium plug in costs money but
offers more advanced features than a free plug in might have.
Now if I just said that all the plug ins we see on this screen are free you might be wondering where
can we find the premium plug ins.
Well there is not a single unified list of all premium plugins.
Instead they are scattered throughout the web each with their own Web site.
You purchase a premium plug in through an external third party website and once your purchase order
is complete you'll be given a zip file which contains the plug in.
You say that zip file to your computer and then back in your Wordpress admin dashboard.
If you click on plug ins in the left hand side bar and then click on Add new.
Now you can leverage this upload plugin button.
So when you click on that button then you simply select the zip file that you were given from the publisher
of the premium plug in that you purchased.
Now I do want to bring something to your attention before you go out and start purchasing any premium
plug ins.
So with free plug ins all of the plug ins that we can search through through the Wordpress admin dashboard
amongst those thousands of free plug ins we can rest assured that the Wordpress team has reviewed and
approved each plug in.
This means that the free plug ins have been reviewed and scanned and they are indeed safe and don't
contain any malicious code that could display Secret ads on our website or steal our passwords or anything
else evil like that.
We do not get that same peace of mind with premium plug ins since each premium plug in lives on its
own third party Web site.
It's up to us to do our own research and determine if the publisher of a premium plug in is reputable
and trustworthy.
So off the top of my head I know that Pippin's plugins and elegant themes are two examples of reputable
trustworthy premium plugin creators.
I'm not affiliated with them.
They're just well-known and have great reputations.
Now there are countless other trustworthy premium plugin creators but you get my point.
It's a matter of word of mouth and searching for reviews of plugins and companies on Google.
So long story short I would always begin by searching for a free plug in and only if you cannot find
a free plug in to do what you need to do.
Only at that point would I venture into the premium plug in market and then before you reach for your
credit card to buy the premium plug in.
First make sure that the company you're buying from is reputable and trustworthy.
Usually a quick Google search for is blank legit will do the trick.
OK not changing gears next.
Let's talk about free themes vs premium themes.
Now this is basically the exact same situation as free plug ins versus premium plug ins.
So I'm not going to repeat literally everything.
However if we go into our admin dashboard and click on appearance in the left hand sidebar and then
click add new to add a new theme.
All of these themes that we can search through from within our WordPress admin area.
These are all free themes but there's a whole other world out there of premium themes.
So just like with plugins I recommend searching through the free themes but if you can't find a free
theme that you like then it might be time to venture into the premium the market.
So just like premium plugins premium themes live on third party websites.
So once you find a premium theme that you like and you complete your purchase order again they will
give you a zip file which contains the theme and then back in your admin dashboard if you just click
on appearance and then add new.
Now you can leverage the upload theme button and just select the zip file of the theme that you purchased.
OK so at this point so far we've talked about Google researching.
When it comes to WordPress we've discussed premium plugins and premium themes and with just those three
tools a lot of people are able to create a job or business or career for themselves of creating WordPress
Web sites for clients.
There is however another way to create even more unique or custom solutions with wordpress.
And that is to create your own theme.
So if you don't love any of the themes you've looked at whether they are free or premium and you want
100 percent control over the way things look your best bet is to simply create your own new theme yourself.
Now creating a theme does require you to learn how to write code.
So this option is not for everyone but I can say that it's not nearly as scary as it might sound.
Now if this route of coding and creating your own themes sounds interesting to you here's the path that
I would recommend.
So first before worrying specifically about WordPress themes.
Begin by learning the basics of two computer languages named HTL and CSX.
These two languages have nothing to do with wordpress specifically but instead these are the two languages
that every Web site on the planet is created from.
There are tons of excellent guides on the Internet to help you learn.
H T M L in C Ss.
Now once you're comfortable with H TMLC SS then you can look for a guide to WordPress theme files and
a language named ph p.
I know those last couple of sentences might have sounded like meaningless technobabble.
And again the coding path is not for everyone.
So don't feel like you need to follow it but if it's something that you are at all interested in I really
encourage you to give it a go because I've taught coding to countless people and one of the most common
things I hear back is hey this is really difficult.
But it's not as bad as I thought it would be.
Anyways long story short you don't need to be a genius to get into code and on the other hand or do
you need the code to be an insanely successful WordPress creator.
So the choice is yours follow the path that sounds the most interesting to you.
OK.
And that's going to bring things to a close.
I encourage you to keep experimenting keep building new things and most importantly take advantage of
the Course's discussion features to ask myself and your fellow students any questions you might have.
Wordpress is all about community.
So let's continue to share our best tips and tricks and resources with each other.
I want to thank you for coming along on this journey.
We all speak the same basic WordPress vocabulary now and I'm excited to see what you create with it.
Remember to have fun during the process and maybe help a friend or family member get started themselves
because a lot of people would love to create Web sites but they don't know where to begin and you teaching
them Wordpress is one of the best ways for you to keep learning yourself.
Anyways take care and I'll see you around.